SS2 Quant Methods

Friday, June 25, 2021

12:42 PM

 

# READING 6. THE TIME VALUE OF MONEY

 

##### a interpret interest rates as required rates of return, discount rates, or opportunity costs;

-   ![](media/image1.png){width="7.229166666666667in"
    height="0.4791666666666667in"}

##### b explain an interest rate as the sum of a real risk-­free rate and premiums that compensate investors for bearing distinct types of risk;

-   Interest rate = real risk-free rate + maturity premium (time) +
    default risk premium () + liquidity premium(convert to cash\$) +
    inflation risk premium \[nominal risk-free rate\]

##### c calculate and interpret the effective annual rate, given the stated annual interest rate and the frequency of compounding; 

-   ![](media/image2.png){width="5.0625in"
    height="0.2604166666666667in"}

##### d solve time value of money problems for different frequencies of compounding; 

-   Effective annual rate (EAR) = (1 + Periodic interest rate)*^m^* -- 1

![](media/image3.png){width="7.291666666666667in"
height="0.19791666666666666in"}

##### e calculate and interpret the future value (FV) and present value (PV) of a single sum of money, an ordinary annuity, an annuity due, a perpetuity (PV only), and a series of unequal cash flows;

##### f demonstrate the use of a time line in modeling and solving time value of money problems.

An **annuity**: a finite set of level sequential cash flows. A
**perpetuity** is a perpetual annuity, or a set of level never-ending
sequential cash flows-first cash now.

-   An **ordinary annuity** has a first cash flow that occurs one period
    from now (indexed at t = 1).

-   An **annuity due** has a first cash flow that occurs immediately
    (indexed at t = 0).

calculation for an annuity (A) due: PV=A1−1(1+r)Nr(1+r),

 

# READING 7. STATISTICAL CONCEPTS AND MARKET RETURNS

 

##### a distinguish between descriptive statistics and inferential statistics, between a population and a sample, and among the types of measurement scales;

##### b define a parameter, a sample statistic, and a frequency distribution; 

-   **Descriptive statistics**: study of summarized data effectively to
    describe the import aspects. **Inferential statistics**: forecasts,
    estimates, or judgements about a larger group from an observed
    smaller group. **Sample [statistics]{.ul}**: a computed quantity to
    describe a sample(para

-   **Population**: all members of a specified group; **Sample**: subset
    of pop;

> **Parameter**: descriptive measure of a population characteristic, eg
> mean, range, variance

-   **Measurement scales**: nominal (categorical data), ordinal (ranking
    categorical), interval (differ in ranking is equal), ratio
    (strongest, true zero point as origin).

##### ![](media/image4.png){width="7.604166666666667in" height="0.4895833333333333in"}

-   ![](media/image5.png){width="7.28125in" height="0.46875in"}

##### d describe the properties of a data set presented as a histogram or a frequency polygon;

-   Cumulative frequency distribution: [Height]{.ul} of each bar
    represents the [absolute frequency]{.ul} for each return interval.
    **Frequency polygon**: A graph of a frequency distribution obtained
    by drawing straight lines joining successive points representing the
    class frequencies.

##### e calculate and interpret measures of central tendency, including the population mean, sample mean, arithmetic mean(measure of a typical outcome of assets), weighted average or mean, geometric mean, harmonic mean, median, and mode; cross-sectional data, time-series data

-   Measure of location include central tendency and other measures of
    location/distribution. **Modal intervals**: most frequently
    occurring interval of grouped data.

![Center of Gravity Analogy for the Arithmetic Mean 10 Fulcrum When the
fulcrum is placed at 8, the bar is perfectly balanced. 11 12
](media/image6.png){width="4.677083333333333in" height="1.8125in"}

-   ![](media/image7.png){width="7.25in" height="0.7708333333333334in"}

##### f calculate and interpret quantiles of \[quartiles(1/4), quintiles(1/5), deciles(1/10), percentiles\];

##### g calculate and interpret 1) a range and a mean absolute deviation and 2) the variance and standard deviation of a population and of a sample;

-   Mean absolute deviation always ≤ standard deviation; arithmetic sum
    of the deviations around the mean always=0!

-   Downside risk dispersion: semivariance(average squared deviation
    below mean), semistandard deviation(positive square root of
    semivariance), target semi(below target).

##### h calculate and interpret the proportion of observations falling within a specified number of standard deviations of the mean using Chebyshev's inequality: 

![](media/image8.png){width="7.645833333333333in" height="0.46875in"}

##### i calculate and interpret the coefficient of variation;

-   ![](media/image9.png){width="4.677083333333333in"
    height="0.2604166666666667in"}

##### j explain skewness and the meaning of a positively or negatively skewed return distribution;

##### k describe relative locations of mean, median, mode for unimodal, nonsymmetrical distribution;

##### l explain measures of sample skewness and kurtosis; 

![Distribution Skewed to the Right (Positively Skewed) Distribution
Skewed to the Left (Negatively Skewed)
](media/image10.png){width="4.947916666666667in"
height="1.3333333333333333in"}

-   ![](media/image11.png){width="7.3125in"
    height="0.6979166666666666in"}

-   ![](media/image12.png){width="7.333333333333333in"
    height="0.9166666666666666in"}

##### m compare the use of arithmetic and geometric means when analyzing investment returns. 

 

# READING 8. PROBABILITY CONCEPTS

 

##### a define a random variable, an outcome, an event, mutually exclusive events, exhaustive events;

##### b state the two defining properties of probability and distinguish among empirical(a relative frequency of occurrence), subjective, and priori(logical analysis rather observation judgment);

##### c state the probability of an event in terms of odds for and against the event; 

-   Exhaustive: Covering or containing all possible outcomes. Pairs
    arbitrage trade: defined by Dutch Book Theorem, inconsistent
    probabilities create profit opportunities.

![](media/image13.png){width="6.614583333333333in" height="0.3125in"}

##### d distinguish between unconditional(marginal) and conditional probabilities; 

##### e explain the multiplication, addition, and total probability rules; 

##### f calculate and interpret 1) the joint probability of two events, 2) the probability that at least one of two events will occur, given the probability of each and the joint probability of the two events, and 3) a joint probability of any number of independent events;

##### g distinguish between dependent and independent events; 

##### h calculate and interpret an unconditional probability using the total probability rule;

##### i explain the use of conditional expectation in investment applications; 

##### j explain the use of a tree(mutually exclusive but dependent, conditional) diagram represent an investment problem; 

##### k calculate and interpret covariance and correlation and interpret a scatterplot; 

##### l calculate and interpret the expected value, variance, and standard deviation of a random variable and of returns on a portfolio;

##### m calculate and interpret covariance given a joint probability function; 

-   The covariance of returns is positive when the returns on both
    assets tend to be on the same side (above or below) their expected
    values at the same time

##### n calculate and interpret an updated probability using Bayes' formula; 

![](media/image14.png){width="7.604166666666667in"
height="0.6770833333333334in"}

##### o identify the most appropriate method to solve a particular counting problem and solve counting problems using factorial, combination, and permutation concepts.

![、 0 淑 以 キ 争 0 又 ゝ も ス ニ 8 ・ て ニ j て \' 0 X ℃ --- 十 ラ
、 0 キ 、 て ) 9 \' 0 ← ー は 疉 ( ル ( ル = 第 5 MX +
](media/image15.jpeg){width="6.791666666666667in"
height="8.989583333333334in"}

![00 \' 0 一 、 0 淑 以 キ 0 メ ゝ も ス ニ 8 ・ て ニ て \' 0 X \' 0 ′
り ス 9 , 0 十 ラ 、 0 十 、 て ) 9 \' 0 ( 嵭 ( ル = 第
](media/image16.jpeg){width="6.947916666666667in"
height="9.020833333333334in"}

#  

#  

# READING 9. COMMON PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS

 

##### a define a probability distribution and distinguish between discrete and continuous random variables and their probability functions; 

##### b describe the set of possible outcomes of a specified discrete random variable; c interpret a cumulative distribution function; d calculate and interpret probabilities for a random variable, given its cumulative distribution function;

##### e define a discrete uniform random variable, a Bernoulli random variable, and a binomial random variable;

##### f calculate and interpret probabilities given the discrete uniform and the binomial distribution functions;

##### g construct a binomial tree to describe stock price movement; h define the continuous uniform distribution and calculate and interpret probabilities, given a continuous uniform distribution; i explain the key properties of the normal distribution;

##### j distinguish between a univariate and a multivariate distribution and explain the role of correlation in the multivariate normal distribution;

##### k determine the probability that a normally distributed random variable lies inside a given interval;

##### l define the standard normal distribution, explain how to standardize a random variable, and calculate and interpret probabilities using the standard normal distribution;

##### m define shortfall risk, calculate the safety-­first ratio, and select an optimal portfolio using Roy's safety-­first criterion;

##### n explain the relationship between normal and lognormal distributions and why the lognormal distribution is used to model asset prices;

##### o distinguish between discretely and continuously compounded rates of return and calculate and interpret a continuously compounded rate of return, given a specific holding period return;

##### p explain Monte Carlo simulation and describe its applications and limitations; q compare Monte Carlo simulation and historical simulation.

 

 

# READING 10. SAMPLING AND ESTIMATION

 

a define simple random sampling and a sampling distribution;

b explain sampling error;

c distinguish between simple random and stratified random sampling;

d distinguish between time-­series and cross-­sectional data; e explain
the central limit theorem and its importance; f calculate and interpret
the standard error of the sample mean; g identify and describe desirable
properties of an estimator; h distinguish between a point estimate and a
confidence interval estimate of a population parameter;

i describe properties of Student's t-distribution and calculate and
interpret its degrees of freedom;

j calculate and interpret a confidence interval for a population mean,
given a normal distribution with 1) a known population variance, 2) an
unknown population variance, or 3) an unknown population variance and a
large sample size;

k describe the issues regarding selection of the appropriate sample
size, data-mining bias, sample selection bias, survivorship bias,
look-­ahead bias, and time-period bias.

 

 

READING 11. HYPOTHESIS TESTING

 

a define a hypothesis, describe the steps of hypothesis testing, and
describe and interpret the choice of the null and alternative
hypotheses;

b distinguish between one-­tailed and two-­tailed tests of hypotheses; c
explain a test statistic, Type I and Type II errors, a significance
level, and how significance levels are used in hypothesis testing;

d explain a decision rule, the power of a test, and the relation between
confidence intervals and hypothesis tests;

e distinguish between a statistical result and an economically
meaningful result; f explain and interpret the p-value as it relates to
hypothesis testing; g identify the appropriate test statistic and
interpret the results for a hypothesis test concerning the population
mean of both large and small samples when the population is normally or
approximately normally distributed and the variance is 1) known or 2)
unknown;

h identify the appropriate test statistic and interpret the results for
a hypothesis test concerning the equality of the population means of two
at least approximately normally distributed populations, based on
independent random samples with 1) equal or 2) unequal assumed
variances;

i identify the appropriate test statistic and interpret the results for
a hypothesis test concerning the mean difference of two normally
distributed populations;

j identify the appropriate test statistic and interpret the results for
a hypothesis test concerning 1) the variance of a normally distributed
population, and 2) the equality of the variances of two normally
distributed populations based on two independent random samples;

k formulate a test of the hypothesis that the population correlation
coefficient equals zero and determine whether the hypothesis is rejected
at a given level of significance;

l distinguish between parametric and nonparametric tests and describe
situations in which the use of nonparametric tests may be appropriate.
